<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book I: The Sorrows of Boethius</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="part">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Sorrows of Boethius</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Boethius’ complaint (Song <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>). <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Philosophy appears to Boethius, drives away the Muses of Poetry, and herself laments (Song <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>) the disordered condition of his mind.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Boethius is speechless with amazement. Philosophy wipes away the tears that have clouded his eyesight.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Boethius recognises his mistress Philosophy. To his wondering inquiries she explains her presence, and recalls to his mind the persecutions to which Philosophy has oftentimes from of old been subjected by an ignorant world. <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Philosophy bids Boethius declare his griefs. He relates the story of his unjust accusation and ruin. He concludes with a prayer (Song <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>) that the moral disorder in human affairs may be set right.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Philosophy admits the justice of Boethius’ self-vindication, but grieves rather for the unhappy change in his mind. She will first tranquillize his spirit by soothing remedies.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. Philosophy tests Boethius’ mental state by certain questions, and discovers three chief causes of his soul’s sickness: (1) He has forgotten his own true nature; (2) he knows not the end towards which the whole universe tends; (3) he knows not the means by which the world is governed.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="book-1-song" epub:type="z3998:subchapter z3998:song">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Song</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Boethius’ Complaint</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Who wrought my studious numbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smoothly once in happier days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now perforce in tears and sadness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Learn a mournful strain to raise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, the Muses, grief-dishevelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guide my pen and voice my woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down their cheeks unfeigned the tear drops</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To my sad complainings flow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These alone in danger’s hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faithful found, have dared attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the footsteps of the exile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his lonely journey’s end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These that were the pride and pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my youth and high estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still remain the only solace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the old man’s mournful fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old? Ah yes; swift, ere I knew it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these sorrows on me pressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Age hath come; lo, Grief hath bid me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wear the garb that fits her best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er my head untimely sprinkled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These white hairs my woes proclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the skin hangs loose and shrivelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On this sorrow-shrunken frame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blest is death that intervenes not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the sweet, sweet years of peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But unto the brokenhearted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they call him, brings release!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Death passes by the wretched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shuts his ear and slumbers deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not heed the cry of anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will not close the eyes that weep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, while yet inconstant Fortune</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poured her gifts and all was bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death’s dark hour had all but whelmed me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the gloom of endless night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, because misfortune’s shadow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath o’erclouded that false face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cruel Life still halts and lingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I loathe his weary race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends, why did ye once so lightly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vaunt me happy among men?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely he who so hath fallen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not firmly founded then.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
