<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book II: The Vanity of Fortune’s Gifts</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="part">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">The Vanity of Fortune’s Gifts</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p id="summary-2" epub:type="bridgehead"><abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Philosophy reproves Boethius for the foolishness of his complaints against Fortune. Her very nature is caprice.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Philosophy in Fortune’s name replies to Boethius’ reproaches, and proves that the gifts of Fortune are hers to give and to take away.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Boethius falls back upon his present sense of misery. Philosophy reminds him of the brilliancy of his former fortunes.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Boethius objects that the memory of past happiness is the bitterest portion of the lot of the unhappy. Philosophy shows that much is still left for which he may be thankful. None enjoy perfect satisfaction with their lot. But happiness depends not on anything which Fortune can give. It is to be sought within.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. All the gifts of Fortune are external; they can never truly be our own. Man cannot find his good in worldly possessions. Riches bring anxiety and trouble.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. High place without virtue is an evil, not a good. Power is an empty name.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. Fame is a thing of little account when compared with the immensity of the Universe and the endlessness of Time.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. One service only can Fortune do, when she reveals her own nature and distinguishes true friends from false.</p>
			</header>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
