<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IV: Good and Ill Fortune</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="part">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Good and Ill Fortune</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead"><abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. The mystery of the seeming moral confusion. Philosophy engages to make this plain, and to fulfil her former promise to the full.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Accordingly, (a) she first expounds the paradox that the good alone have power, the bad are altogether powerless.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. (b) The righteous never lack their reward, nor the wicked their punishment.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. (c) The wicked are more unhappy when they accomplish their desires than when they fail to attain them. (d) Evildoers are more fortunate when they expiate their crimes by suffering punishment than when they escape unpunished. (e) The wrongdoer is more wretched than he who suffers injury.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Boethius still cannot understand why the distribution of happiness and misery to the righteous and the wicked seems the result of chance. Philosophy replies that this only seems so because we do not understand the principles of God’s moral governance.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. The distinction of Fate and Providence. The apparent moral confusion is due to our ignorance of the secret counsels of God’s providence. If we possessed the key, we should see how all things are guided to good.⁠—<abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. Thus all fortune is good fortune; for it either rewards, disciplines, amends, or punishes, and so is either useful or just.</p>
			</header>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
