<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-4-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<article id="prose-4-7">
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
				<p>“Dost thou, then, see the consequence of all that we have said?”</p>
				<p>“Nay; what consequence?”</p>
				<p>“That absolutely every fortune is good fortune.”</p>
				<p>“And how can that be?” said I.</p>
				<p>“Attend,” said she. “Since every fortune, welcome and unwelcome alike, has for its object the reward or trial of the good, and the punishing or amending of the bad, every fortune must be good, since it is either just or useful.”</p>
				<p>“The reasoning is exceeding true,” said I, “the conclusion, so long as I reflect upon the providence and fate of which thou hast taught me, based on a strong foundation. Yet, with thy leave, we will count it among those which just now thou didst set down as paradoxical.”</p>
				<p>“And why so?” said she.</p>
				<p>“Because ordinary speech is apt to assert, and that frequently, that some men’s fortune is bad.”</p>
				<p>“Shall we, then, for awhile approach more nearly to the language of the vulgar, that we may not seem to have departed too far from the usages of men?”</p>
				<p>“At thy good pleasure,” said I.</p>
				<p>“That which advantageth thou callest good, dost thou not?”</p>
				<p>“Certainly.”</p>
				<p>“And that which either tries or amends advantageth?”</p>
				<p>“Granted.”</p>
				<p>“Is good, then?”</p>
				<p>“Of course.”</p>
				<p>“Well, this is <em>their</em> case who have attained virtue and wage war with adversity, or turn from vice and lay hold on the path of virtue.”</p>
				<p>“I cannot deny it.”</p>
				<p>“What of the good fortune which is given as reward of the good⁠—do the vulgar adjudge it bad?”</p>
				<p>“Anything but that; they deem it to be the best, as indeed it is.”</p>
				<p>“What, then, of that which remains, which, though it is harsh, puts the restraint of just punishment on the bad⁠—does popular opinion deem it good?”</p>
				<p>“Nay; of all that can be imagined, it is accounted the most miserable.”</p>
				<p>“Observe, then, if, in following popular opinion, we have not ended in a conclusion quite paradoxical.”</p>
				<p>“How so?” said I.</p>
				<p>“Why, it results from our admissions that of all who have attained, or are advancing in, or are aiming at virtue, the fortune is in every case good, while for those who remain in their wickedness fortune is always utterly bad.”</p>
				<p>“It is true,” said I; “yet no one dare acknowledge it.”</p>
				<p>“Wherefore,” said she, “the wise man ought not to take it ill, if ever he is involved in one of fortune’s conflicts, any more than it becomes a brave soldier to be offended when at any time the trumpet sounds for battle. The time of trial is the express opportunity for the one to win glory, for the other to perfect his wisdom. Hence, indeed, virtue gets its name, because, relying on its own efficacy, it yieldeth not to adversity. And ye who have taken your stand on virtue’s steep ascent, it is not for you to be dissolved in delights or enfeebled by pleasure; ye close in conflict⁠—yea, in conflict most sharp⁠—with all fortune’s vicissitudes, lest ye suffer foul fortune to overwhelm or fair fortune to corrupt you. Hold the mean with all your strength. Whatever falls short of this, or goes beyond, is fraught with scorn of happiness, and misses the reward of toil. It rests with you to make your fortune what you will. Verily, every harsh-seeming fortune, unless it either disciplines or amends, is punishment.”</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-4-7" epub:type="z3998:song">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h4>
							<span epub:type="label">Song</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
						</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">The Hero’s Path</p>
					</hgroup>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ten years a tedious warfare raged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ere Ilium’s smoking ruins paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For wedlock stained and faith betrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great Atrides’ wrath assuaged.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when heaven’s anger asked a life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And baffling winds his course withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The king put off his fatherhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew his child with priestly knife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When by the cavern’s glimmering light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His comrades dear Odysseus saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the huge Cyclops’ hideous maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engulfed, he wept the piteous sight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But blinded soon, and wild with pain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In bitter tears and sore annoy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For that foul feast’s unholy joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grim Polyphemus paid again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His labours for Alcides win</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A name of glory far and wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He tamed the Centaur’s haughty pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the lion reft his skin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The foul birds with sure darts he slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The golden fruit he stole⁠—in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The dragon’s watch; with triple chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hell’s depths Cerberus he drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With their fierce lord’s own flesh he fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The wild steeds; Hydra overcame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With fire. ’Neath his own waves in shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maimed Achelous hid his head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Huge Cacus for his crimes was slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On Libya’s sands Antæus hurled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The shoulders that upheld the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great boar’s dribbled spume did stain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Last toil of all⁠—his might sustained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The ball of heaven, nor did he bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beneath; this toil, his labour’s end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prize of heaven’s high glory gained.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Brave hearts, press on! Lo, heavenward lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These bright examples! From the fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Turn not your backs in coward flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth’s conflict won, the stars your meed!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
