<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>Even so the clouds of my melancholy were broken up. I saw the clear sky, and regained the power to recognise the face of my physician. Accordingly, when I had lifted my eyes and fixed my gaze upon her, I beheld my nurse, Philosophy, whose halls I had frequented from my youth up.</p>
			<p>“Ah! why,” I cried, “mistress of all excellence, hast thou come down from on high, and entered the solitude of this my exile? Is it that thou, too, even as I, mayst be persecuted with false accusations?”</p>
			<p id="prose-1-3-p-3">“Could I desert thee, child,” said she, “and not lighten the burden which thou hast taken upon thee through the hatred of my name, by sharing this trouble? Even forgetting that it were not lawful for Philosophy to leave companionless the way of the innocent, should I, thinkest thou, fear to incur reproach, or shrink from it, as though some strange new thing had befallen? Thinkest thou that now, for the first time in an evil age, Wisdom hath been assailed by peril? Did I not often in days of old, before my servant Plato lived, wage stern warfare with the rashness of folly? In his lifetime, too, Socrates, his master, won with my aid the victory of an unjust death. And when, one after the other, the Epicurean herd, the Stoic, and the rest, each of them as far as in them lay, went about to seize the heritage he left, and were dragging me off protesting and resisting, as their booty, they tore in pieces the garment which I had woven with my own hands, and, clutching the torn pieces, went off, believing that the whole of me had passed into their possession. And some of them, because some traces of my vesture were seen upon them, were destroyed through the mistake of the lewd multitude, who falsely deemed them to be my disciples. It may be thou knowest not of the banishment of Anaxagoras, of the poison draught of Socrates, nor of Zeno’s torturing, because these things happened in a distant country; yet mightest thou have learnt the fate of Arrius, of Seneca, of Soranus, whose stories are neither old nor unknown to fame. These men were brought to destruction for no other reason than that, settled as they were in my principles, their lives were a manifest contrast to the ways of the wicked. So there is nothing thou shouldst wonder at, if on the seas of this life we are tossed by storm-blasts, seeing that we have made it our chiefest aim to refuse compliance with evildoers. And though, maybe, the host of the wicked is many in number, yet is it contemptible, since it is under no leadership, but is hurried hither and thither at the blind driving of mad error. And if at times and seasons they set in array against us, and fall on in overwhelming strength, our leader draws off her forces into the citadel while they are busy plundering the useless baggage. But we from our vantage ground, safe from all this wild work, laugh to see them making prize of the most valueless of things, protected by a bulwark which aggressive folly may not aspire to reach.”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h3>
							<span epub:type="label">Song</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
						</h3>
						<p epub:type="title">Nothing Can Subdue Virtue</p>
					</hgroup>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whoso calm, serene, sedate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sets his foot on haughty fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firm and steadfast, come what will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keeps his mien unconquered still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him the rage of furious seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tossing high wild menaces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the flames from smoky forges</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Vesuvius disgorges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the bolt that from the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smites the tower, can terrify.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, then, shouldst thou feel affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the tyrant’s weakling might?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dread him not, nor fear no harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shall his rage disarm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who to hope or fear gives way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost his bosom’s rightful sway⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath cast away his shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a coward fled the field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath forged all unaware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fetters his own neck must bear!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
