<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Song</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">His Despondency</p>
			</hgroup>
			<article id="song-1-2" epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>Alas! in what abyss his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Is plunged, how wildly tossed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still, still towards the outer night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She sinks, her true light lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As oft as, lashed tumultuously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By earthborn blasts, care’s waves rise high.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet once he ranged the open heavens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The sun’s bright pathway tracked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watched how the cold moon waxed and waned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor rested, till there lacked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his wide ken no star that steers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the maze of circling spheres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The causes why the blusterous winds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Vex ocean’s tranquil face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hand doth turn the stable globe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or why his even race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the ruddy east the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the western waves doth run:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What is it tempers cunningly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The placid hours of spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that it blossoms with the rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For earth’s engarlanding:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loads the year’s maturer prime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clustered grapes in autumn time:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All this he knew⁠—thus ever strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Deep Nature’s lore to guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, reft of reason’s light, he lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And bonds his neck oppress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While by the heavy load constrained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes to this dull earth are chained.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>“But the time,” said she, “calls rather for healing than for lamentation.” Then, with her eyes bent full upon me, “Art thou that man,” she cries, “who, erstwhile fed with the milk and reared upon the nourishment which is mine to give, had grown up to the full vigour of a manly spirit? And yet I had bestowed such armour on thee as would have proved an invincible defence, hadst thou not first cast it away. Dost thou know me? Why art thou silent? Is it shame or amazement that hath struck thee dumb? Would it were shame; but, as I see, a stupor hath seized upon thee.” Then, when she saw me not only answering nothing, but mute and utterly incapable of speech, she gently touched my breast with her hand, and said: “There is no danger; these are the symptoms of lethargy, the usual sickness of deluded minds. For awhile he has forgotten himself; he will easily recover his memory, if only he first recognises me. And that he may do so, let me now wipe his eyes that are clouded with a mist of mortal things.” Thereat, with a fold of her robe, she dried my eyes all swimming with tears.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
