<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<article id="song-1-5" epub:type="z3998:song">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h4>
							<span epub:type="label">Song</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
						</h4>
						<p epub:type="title">Boethius’ Prayer</p>
					</hgroup>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Builder of yon starry dome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou that whirlest, throned eternal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s swift globe, and, as they roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Guid’st the stars by laws supernal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">So in full-sphered splendour dight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Cynthia dims the lamps of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But unto the orb fraternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Closer drawn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> doth lose her light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Who at fall of eventide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hesper, his cold radiance showeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lucifer his beams doth hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Paling as the sun’s light groweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Brief, while winter’s frost holds sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">By thy will the space of day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Swift, when summer’s fervour gloweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Speed the hours of night away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou dost rule the changing year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When rude Boreas oppresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall the leaves; they reappear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wooed by Zephyr’s soft caresses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Fields that Sirius burns deep grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">By Arcturus’ watch were sown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Each the reign of law confesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Keeps the place that is his own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Sovereign Ruler, Lord of all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Can it be that Thou disdainest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only man? ’Gainst him, poor thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wanton Fortune plays her vainest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Guilt’s deserved punishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Falleth on the innocent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">High uplifted, the profanest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On the just their malice vent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Virtue cowers in dark retreats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Crime’s foul stain the righteous beareth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perjury and false deceits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hurt not him the wrong who dareth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">But whene’er the wicked trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In ill strength to work their lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Kings, whom nations’ awe declareth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Mighty, grovel in the dust.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Look, oh look upon this earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou who on law’s sure foundation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Framedst all! Have we no worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We poor men, of all creation?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Sore we toss on fortune’s tide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Master, bid the waves subside!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And earth’s ways with consummation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of Thy heaven’s order guide!”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="prose-1-5">
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>When I had poured out my griefs in this long and unbroken strain of lamentation, she, with calm countenance, and in no wise disturbed at my complainings, thus spake:</p>
				<p>“When I saw thee sorrowful, in tears, I straightway knew thee wretched and an exile. But how far distant that exile I should not know, had not thine own speech revealed it. Yet how far indeed from thy country hast thou, not been banished, but rather hast strayed; or, if thou wilt have it banishment, hast banished thyself! For no one else could ever lawfully have had this power over thee. Now, if thou wilt call to mind from what country thou art sprung, it is not ruled, as once was the Athenian polity, by the sovereignty of the multitude, but ‘one is its Ruler, one its King,’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> who takes delight in the number of His citizens, not in their banishment; to submit to whose governance and to obey whose ordinances is perfect freedom. Art thou ignorant of that most ancient law of this thy country, whereby it is decreed that no one whatsoever, who hath chosen to fix there his dwelling, may be sent into exile? For truly there is no fear that one who is encompassed by its ramparts and defences should deserve to be exiled. But he who has ceased to wish to dwell therein, he likewise ceases to deserve to do so. And so it is not so much the aspect of this place which moves me, as thy aspect; not so much the library walls set off with glass and ivory which I miss, as the chamber of thy mind, wherein I once placed, not books, but that which gives books their value, the doctrines which my books contain. Now, what thou hast said of thy services to the commonweal is true, only too little compared with the greatness of thy deservings. The things laid to thy charge whereof thou hast spoken, whether such as redound to thy credit, or mere false accusations, are publicly known. As for the crimes and deceits of the informers, thou hast rightly deemed it fitting to pass them over lightly, because the popular voice hath better and more fully pronounced upon them. Thou hast bitterly complained of the injustice of the senate. Thou hast grieved over my calumniation, and likewise hast lamented the damage to my good name. Finally, thine indignation blazed forth against fortune; thou hast complained of the unfairness with which thy merits have been recompensed. Last of all thy frantic muse framed a prayer that the peace which reigns in heaven might rule earth also. But since a throng of tumultuous passions hath assailed thy soul, since thou art distraught with anger, pain, and grief, strong remedies are not proper for thee in this thy present mood. And so for a time I will use milder methods, that the tumours which have grown hard through the influx of disturbing passion may be softened by gentle treatment, till they can bear the force of sharper remedies.”</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
