<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>Then said she: ‘This debate about providence is an old one, and is vigorously discussed by Cicero in his “Divination”; thou also hast long and earnestly pondered the problem, yet no one has had diligence and perseverance enough to find a solution. And the reason of this obscurity is that the movement of human reasoning cannot cope with the simplicity of the Divine foreknowledge; for if a conception of its nature could in any wise be framed, no shadow of uncertainty would remain. With a view of making this at last clear and plain, I will begin by considering the arguments by which thou art swayed. First, I inquire into the reasons why thou art dissatisfied with the solution proposed, which is to the effect that, seeing the fact of foreknowledge is not thought the cause of the necessity of future events, foreknowledge is not to be deemed any hindrance to the freedom of the will. Now, surely the sole ground on which thou arguest the necessity of the future is that things which are foreknown cannot fail to come to pass. But if, as thou wert ready to acknowledge just now, the fact of foreknowledge imposes no necessity on things future, what reason is there for supposing the results of voluntary action constrained to a fixed issue? Suppose, for the sake of argument, and to see what follows, we assume that there is no foreknowledge. Are willed actions, then, tied down to any necessity in <em>this</em> case?’</p>
			<p>‘Certainly not.’</p>
			<p>‘Let us assume foreknowledge again, but without its involving any actual necessity; the freedom of the will, I imagine, will remain in complete integrity. But thou wilt say that, even although the foreknowledge is not the necessity of the future event’s occurrence, yet it is a sign that it will necessarily happen. Granted; but in this case it is plain that, even if there had been no foreknowledge, the issues would have been inevitably certain. For a sign only indicates something which is, does not bring to pass that of which it is the sign. We require to show beforehand that all things, without exception, happen of necessity in order that a preconception may be a sign of this necessity. Otherwise, if there is no such universal necessity, neither can any preconception be a sign of a necessity which exists not. Manifestly, too, a proof established on firm grounds of reason must be drawn not from signs and loose general arguments, but from suitable and necessary causes. But how can it be that things foreseen should ever fail to come to pass? Why, this is to suppose us to believe that the events which providence foresees to be coming were not about to happen, instead of our supposing that, although they should come to pass, yet there was no necessity involved in their own nature compelling their occurrence. Take an illustration that will help to convey my meaning. There are many things which we see taking place before our eyes⁠—the movements of charioteers, for instance, in guiding and turning their cars, and so on. Now, is any one of these movements compelled by any necessity?’</p>
			<p>‘No; certainly not. There would be no efficacy in skill if all motions took place perforce.’</p>
			<p>‘Then, things which in taking place are free from any necessity as to their being in the present must also, before they take place, be about to happen without necessity. Wherefore there are things which will come to pass, the occurrence of which is perfectly free from necessity. At all events, I imagine that no one will deny that things now taking place were about to come to pass before they were actually happening. Such things, however much foreknown, are in their occurrence <em>free</em>. For even as knowledge of things present imports no necessity into things that are taking place, so foreknowledge of the future imports none into things that are about to come. But this, thou wilt say, is the very point in dispute⁠—whether any foreknowing is possible of things whose occurrence is not necessary. For here there seems to thee a contradiction, and, if they are foreseen, their necessity follows; whereas if there is no necessity, they can by no means be foreknown; and thou thinkest that nothing can be grasped as known unless it is certain, but if things whose occurrence is uncertain are foreknown as certain, this is the very mist of opinion, not the truth of knowledge. For to think of things otherwise than as they are, thou believest to be incompatible with the soundness of knowledge.</p>
			<p>‘Now, the cause of the mistake is this⁠—that men think that all knowledge is cognized purely by the nature and efficacy of the thing known. Whereas the case is the very reverse: all that is known is grasped not conformably to its own efficacy, but rather conformably to the faculty of the knower. An example will make this clear: the roundness of a body is recognised in one way by sight, in another by touch. Sight looks upon it from a distance as a whole by a simultaneous reflection of rays; touch grasps the roundness piecemeal, by contact and attachment to the surface, and by actual movement round the periphery itself. Man himself, likewise, is viewed in one way by Sense, in another by Imagination, in another way, again, by Thought, in another by pure Intelligence. Sense judges figure clothed in material substance, Imagination figure alone without matter. Thought transcends this again, and by its contemplation of universals considers the type itself which is contained in the individual. The eye of Intelligence is yet more exalted; for overpassing the sphere of the universal, it will behold absolute form itself by the pure force of the mind’s vision. Wherein the main point to be considered is this: the higher faculty of comprehension embraces the lower, while the lower cannot rise to the higher. For Sense has no efficacy beyond matter, nor can Imagination behold universal ideas, nor Thought embrace pure form; but Intelligence, looking down, as it were, from its higher standpoint in its intuition of form, discriminates also the several elements which underlie it; but it comprehends them in the same way as it comprehends that form itself, which could be cognized by no other than itself. For it cognizes the universal of Thought, the figure of Imagination, and the matter of Sense, without employing Thought, Imagination, or Sense, but surveying all things, so to speak, under the aspect of pure form by a single flash of intuition. Thought also, in considering the universal, embraces images and sense-impressions without resorting to Imagination or Sense. For it is Thought which has thus defined the universal from its conceptual point of view: “Man is a two-legged animal endowed with reason.” This is indeed a universal notion, yet no one is ignorant that the <em>thing</em> is imaginable and presentable to Sense, because Thought considers it not by Imagination or Sense, but by means of rational conception. Imagination, too, though its faculty of viewing and forming representations is founded upon the senses, nevertheless surveys sense-impressions without calling in Sense, not in the way of Sense-perception, but of Imagination. See’st thou, then, how all things in cognizing use rather their own faculty than the faculty of the things which they cognize? Nor is this strange; for since every judgment is the act of the judge, it is necessary that each should accomplish its task by its own, not by another’s power.’</p>
			<hgroup>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Song</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">A Psychological Fallacy</p>
			</hgroup>
			<a id="FNanchor_R_18" name="FNanchor_R_18"/><a class="fnanchor" href="#Footnote_R_18">[R]</a>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>From the Porch’s murky depths<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Comes a doctrine sage,<br/></span>
					<span>That doth liken living mind<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">To a written page;<br/></span>
					<span>Since all knowledge comes through<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Sense,<br/></span>
					<span>Graven by Experience.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>‘As,’ say they, ‘the pen its marks<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Curiously doth trace<br/></span>
					<span>On the smooth unsullied white<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Of the paper’s face,<br/></span>
					<span>So do outer things impress<br/></span>
					<span>Images on consciousness.’<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>But if verily the mind<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Thus all passive lies;<br/></span>
					<span>If no living power within<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Its own force supplies;<br/></span>
					<span>If it but reflect again,<br/></span>
					<span>Like a glass, things false and vain⁠—<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>Whence the wondrous faculty<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">That perceives and knows,<br/></span>
					<span>That in one fair ordered scheme<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Doth the world dispose;<br/></span>
					<span>Grasps each whole that Sense presents,<br/></span>
					<span>Or breaks into elements?<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>So divides and recombines,<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">And in changeful wise<br/></span>
					<span>Now to low descends, and now<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">To the height doth rise;<br/></span>
					<span>Last in inward swift review<br/></span>
					<span>Strictly sifts the false and true?<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>Of these ample potencies<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Fitter cause, I ween,<br/></span>
					<span>Were Mind’s self than marks impressed<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">By the outer scene.<br/></span>
					<span>Yet the body through the sense<br/></span>
					<span>Stirs the soul’s intelligence.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span>When light flashes on the eye,<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Or sound strikes the ear,<br/></span>
					<span>Mind aroused to due response<br/></span>
					<span class="i2">Makes the message clear;<br/></span>
					<span>And the dumb external signs<br/></span>
					<span>With the hidden forms combines.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<p class="center">FOOTNOTES:</p>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a id="Footnote_R_18" name="Footnote_R_18"/><a href="#FNanchor_R_18"><span class="label">[R]</span></a> A criticism of the doctrine of the mind as a blank sheet of paper on which experience writes, as held by the Stoics in anticipation of Locke. See Zeller, ‘Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics,’ Reichel’s translation, p. 76.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
